>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SATURDAY OCTOBER, 25: THE
WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION SAYS
THE NUMBER OF EBOLA CASES
WORLDWIDE NOW TOPS 10,000.
THE LATEST ON THE DOCTOR
HOSPITALIZED WITH THE DISEASE IN
NEW YORK.
A TOP INFECTIOUS DISEASE EXPERT
WEIGHS IN.
AND IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
YOUTH SOCCER.
IT'S OFTEN VIEWED AS A SAFE
ALTERNATIVE TO FOOTBALL, BUT
SOME EXPERTS NOW BELIEVE KIDS
WHO PLAY THE GAME RISK
CONCUSSIONS.
>> DO WE WANT TO, IN THE NAME OF
SPORT, PUT A CHILD'S BRAIN IN
HARM'S WAY?
>> Sreenivasan: NEXT ON PBS
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS IN
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING.
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
PRESIDENT OBAMA TODAY ONCE AGAIN
APPEALED FOR CALM FOLLOWING THE
NEWS THAT A NEW YORK DOCTOR WHO
TREATED EBOLA PATIENTS IN AFRICA
HAS BEEN HOSPITALIZED WITH THE
DISEASE HIMSELF.
>> WE HAVE TO BE GUIDED BY THE
FACTS, NOT FEAR.
YESTERDAY, NEW YORKERS SHOWED US
THE WAY.
THEY DID WHAT THEY DO EVERY
DAY-- JUMPING ON BUSES, RIDING
THE SUBWAY, CROWDING INTO
ELEVATORS, HEADING INTO WORK,
GATHERING IN PARKS.
THAT SPIRIT, THAT DETERMINATION
TO CARRY ON IS PART OF WHAT
MAKES NEW YORK ONE OF THE
GREAT CITIES IN THE WORLD.
>> Sreenivasan: IN NEW JERSEY
TODAY, A 30-YEAR-OLD NURSE, WHO
WAS QUARANTINED AFTER RETURNING
FROM AFRICA, WAS DETERMINED
TODAY NOT TO HAVE EBOLA.
EVEN SO, SHE'LL REMAIN IN
QUARANTINE FOR ANOTHER 20 DAYS.
LATE YESTERDAY, NEW YORK'S
DEMOCRATIC GOVERNOR ANDREW CUOMO
AND NEW JERSEY'S REPUBLICAN
GOVERNOR CHRIS CHRISTIE
ANNOUNCED NEW, STRICTER RULES
GOVERNING HEALTH CARE WORKERS
RETURNING FROM AFRICA.
ANYONE WHO TREATED EBOLA
PATIENTS THERE WILL BE REQUIRED
TO GO INTO QUARANTINE FOR 21
DAYS.
ILLINOIS TODAY ADOPTED A SIMILAR
POSITION.
THE NEW STATE RULES ARE TOUGHER
THAN THE FEDERAL GUIDELINES.
WE'LL HEAR FROM AN INFECTIOUS
DISEASE SPECIALIST IN A MOMENT.
THREE TEENAGERS IN WASHINGTON
STATE REMAIN IN CRITICAL
CONDITION AND ANOTHER IS IN
SERIOUS CONDITION AFTER BEING
SHOT YESTERDAY BY A FELLOW
STUDENT IN THEIR HIGH SCHOOL
CAFETERIA.
AUTHORITIES ARE STILL
INVESTIGATING WHAT PROMPTED THE
INCIDENT, WHICH LEFT STILL
ANOTHER TEEN DEAD.
THE GUNMAN, WHO LATER KILLED
HIMSELF, WAS IDENTIFIED AS A 14-
YEAR-OLD FRESHMAN.
HE WAS A COUSIN OF TWO OF THE
PEOPLE HE SHOT.
AUTHORITIES SAID HE USED A 40-
CALIBER HANDGUN THAT WAS
PURCHASED LEGALLY.
OVERSEAS, KURDISH FIGHTERS HAVE
REPORTEDLY MADE SIGNIFICANT
PROGRESS IN THEIR MONTH-LONG
BATTLE AGAINST ISIS EXTREMISTS
FOR CONTROL OF THE SYRIAN BORDER
TOWN OF KOBANI.
REUTERS TODAY RELEASED THESE
IMAGES OBTAINED ON SOCIAL MEDIA
SITES REPORTEDLY SHOWING THE
BODIES OF ISIS FIGHTERS AND
WEAPONS CAPTURED FROM THEM.
THERE WAS NEW UNREST ON THE WEST
BANK TODAY FOLLOWING REPORTS
THAT A 14-YEAR-OLD PALESTINIAN-
AMERICAN TEEN HAD BEEN SHOT DEAD
BY ISRAELI TROOPS.
ISRAELI AUTHORITIES SAID THE
TROOPS OPENED FIRE AFTER THE
TEEN TOSSED A FIREBOMB IN THEIR
DIRECTION YESTERDAY.
THE U.S. STATE DEPARTMENT CALLED
FOR A SPEEDY AND TRANSPARENT
INVESTIGATION.
THE 14-YEAR-OLD, IDENTIFIED AS
ORWA ABDEL WAHAB HAMMAD, WAS
BORN IN NEW ORLEANS.
HE MOVED WITH HIS FAMILY TO THE
WEST BANK WHEN HE WAS SIX.
AND BASSIST JACK BRUCE, WHO SANG
AND WROTE MANY OF CREAM'S
BIGGEST HITS INCLUDING "SUNSHINE
OF YOUR LOVE" AND "WHITE ROOM,"
HAS DIED.
HE WAS 71.
THE BAND, WHICH INCLUDED ERIC
CLAPTON AND GINGER BAKER, WAS
INDUCTED INTO THE ROCK AND ROLL
HALL OF FAME IN 1993.
♪
♪ IN THE SUNSHINE
OF YOUR LIFE. ♪
>> Sreenivasan: YOU'VE HEARD
ASSURANCES FROM PUBLIC HEALTH
OFFICIALS THE LAST SEVERAL WEEKS
ABOUT THE EBOLA SCARE.
TONIGHT, WE WANT TO GO INTO MUCH
GREATER DETAIL ABOUT WHEN THE
DISEASE IS DANGEROUS AND WHEN
IT'S NOT.
FOR MORE, WE ARE JOINED BY DR.
STEPHEN MORSE.
HE IS A PROFESSOR OF
EPIDEMIOLOGY AT THE MAILMAN
SCHOOL OF PUBLIC HEALTH AT
COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY HERE IN NEW
YORK.
FIRST, LET ME I GUESS START WITH
THE NEWS FROM YESTERDAY WHEN THE
TWO GOVERNORS SAID THEY WERE
GOING TO TAKE THESE INCREASED
MEASURES OF QUARANTINING MEDICAL
WORKERS WHO COME BACK FROM THESE
COUNTRIES.
WILL THIS WORK OR IS THIS MORE
OF A SYSTEMATIC RESPONSE TO THE
FEAR THAT PEOPLE HAVE?
>> I THINK LARGELY IT'S
SOMETHING THAT LOOKS GOOD AND
WILL MAKE US FEEL BETTER, BUT I
THINK IT IS LARGELY A RESPONSE
TO THE FEAR.
AFTER ALL, THESE HEALTH CARE
WORKERS, ALTHOUGH THEY MAY BE
THE MOST LIKELY TO BE INFECTED
BECAUSE OF THEIR CLOSE CONTACT
WITH THE PATIENTS, ARE ALSO THE
ONES WHO ARE MOST LIKELY TO BE
RESPONSIBLE TO TAKE THEIR
TEMPERATURE AND BE CAREFUL.
>> Sreenivasan: THERE'S THIS
LINE IN THE SAND ABOUT
SYMPTOMATIC VERSUS ASYMPTOMATIC,
THAT PEOPLE ARE CONTAGIOUS WHEN
THEY'RE SYSTEMATIC.
HOW DO WE KNOW ABOUT EBOLA THAT
IT IS NOT CONTAGIOUS BEFORE THE
VICTIM STARTS SHOWING SYMPTOMS?
>> WELL, EVERYTHING WE KNOW
ABOUT EBOLA IS BASED ON THE
EXPERIENCE OF 24 EPIDEMICS FROM
1976 ON.
THE VIRUS, I DON'T THINK, HAS
CHANGED THAT SIGNIFICANTLY.
AND GENERALLY, THESE DON'T
CHANGE THAT MUCH.
SO WHAT WE DO KNOW FROM PAST
EXPERIENCE IS IT REQUIRES DIRECT
CONTACT WITH INFECTED BODILY
FLUIDS OF THE PATIENT, OR
SOMETIMES IN THE CASE OF THOSE
WHO SUCCUMB, THE CORPSE, THE
SKIN CAN ALSO BE INFECTIOUS.
SO IF THEY'RE NOT BLEEDING OR
VOMITING OR DOING ANY OF THOSE
OTHER THINGS, THERE ARE NO
INFECTED LIQUIDS TO COME IN
CONTACT WITH, THE LIKELIHOOD IS
VERY GREAT THAT THEY'RE NOT
GOING TO BE ABLE TO INFECT
ANYONE UNTIL THEY SHOW SYMPTOMS.
>> Sreenivasan: ONE OF THE
CONCERNS HAS BEEN HOW VIRUSES
HAVE MUTATED IN THE PAST.
IS THERE ANY DISCUSSION OF THE
POSSIBILITY THAT THIS VIRUS
COULD MUTATE INTO SOMETHING
THAT'S NOT JUST TRANSMITTED FROM
BODILY FLUIDS BUT SOMETHING THAT
COULD BE TRANSMITTED BY AIR OR
ANY OTHER WAY?
>> WELL, ALL OF THESE VIRUSES
MUTATE.
HIV DOES, INFLUENZA DOES, AND,
EBOLA, OF COURSE, HAS BEEN
STUDIED RECENTLY AND A NUMBER OF
MUTATIONS HAVE BEEN SHOWN BUT WE
DON'T HAVE ANY EXAMPLE EVER OF
ANY VIRUS THAT WHATEVER
MUTATIONS IT'S UNDERGONE HAS
CHANGED IN ITS ROUTE OF
TRANSMISSION.
HIV HAS HAD MANY OPPORTUNITIES
TO DO THAT, AND IT STILL HASN'T
REALLY FUNDAMENTALLY CHANGED IN
THAT RESPECT.
WITH EBOLA, IT MAY NOT BE SO
MUCH MUTATION OR THE AMOUNT OF
MUTATION BUT, YOU KNOW, JUST
SIMPLY THE EXPERIENCE WE HAVE
WITH IT SUGGESTS THAT IT'S NOT
GOING TO CHANGE THAT MUCH.
>> Sreenivasan: OKAY, I'D
LIKE TO DISCUSS A COUPLE OF THE
SCENARIOS THAT NEW YORKERS HERE
WERE VERY CONCERNED ABOUT AND
PERHAPS ABSTRACT FROM THAT
SOMETHING THAT THE REST OF THE
COUNTRY COULD LEARN.
IF THIS DOCTOR WAS STANDING A
FOOT AWAY ON A SUBWAY CAR OR IF
I HAD TAKEN THE TAXI AFTER HE
USED IT, WHAT ARE THE CHANCES OF
GETTING IT IF HE WAS SHOWING
SYMPTOMS VERSUS IF HE WAS NOT?
IF THERE WERE SYMPTOMS AND IF,
FOR EXAMPLE, HE HAD LEFT SOME
BLOOD BEHIND OR VOMITED OR
SOMETHING LIKE THAT, THEN THERE
MIGHT BE SOME RISK, ESPECIALLY
IF ONE HAPPENED TO TOUCH IT, OR
TOUCH IT TO THEIR EYES OR NOSE,
BUT IN MOST CASES, THERE IS VERY
LITTLE RISK.
AND IF THERE ARE NO SYMPTOMS
THERE WOULDN'T BE ANY OF THIS
MATERIAL TO LEAVE BEHIND.
AND THERE'S NOT THAT MUCH VIRUS
IN SWEAT DURING THE EARLY
STAGES.
SO I THINK IT WOULD BE VERY
UNLIKELY, IN FACT ALMOST
IMPOSSIBLE, FOR SOMEONE TO GET
INFECTED BY AN ASYMPTOMATIC
PATIENT, ONE WHO HAS NOT YET
SHOWN SYMPTOMS OF DISEASE.
>> Sreenivasan: ONE OF THE
CONCERNS HERE FOR EXAMPLE IF HE
HAD TOUCHED A SPECIFIC BOWLING
BALL AND IF SOMEBODY ELSE HAD
TOUCHED THAT, RIGHT?
AGAIN, IT HAS TO BE BLOOD OR
VOMIT OR SOMETHING ELSE?
>> YES, IN GENERAL, AND IN
GENERAL, THEY HAVE TO HAVE HAD
SYMPTOMS ALREADY.
AND WE HAVE A NUMBER OF EXAMPLES
THAT I THINK BEAR THIS OUT.
ONE OF THE MOST SEVERELY ILL
PATIENTS, PATRICK SAWYER, FLEW
FROM MONROVIA, SICK AS COULD BE.
HE WAS SO SICK HE COULD BARELY
GET ON THE PLANE TO LAGOS,
NIGERIA, WHERE HE THOUGHT HE HAD
TO GO TO A MEETING AND INSISTED
ON GOING.
AND THE NIGERIAN GOVERNMENT
ACTUALLY DID CONTACT TRACING AND
FOUND ALL THE ONES THEY COULD OF
THE OTHER PASSENGERS ON THE
PLANE.
I THINK THEY FOUND 56 OTHER
PASSENGERS, AND NOT A SINGLE ONE
HAD BECOME INFECTED.
SO IT'S-- UNLESS YOU'RE REALLY
GETTING VERY CLOSE, LIKE THE
HEALTH CARE WORKERS WHO ARE
TAKING CARE OF THE PATIENTS,
IT'S JUST NOT THAT EASY TO
CATCH.
>> Sreenivasan: SO THERE WAS A
LOT OF CONCERN IN NEW YORK WHEN
INITIALLY THAT FIRST NIGHT WE
HEARD THIS PATIENT HAD A 103
TEMPERATURE, AND THEN IT WAS
CLARIFIED THAT IT WAS 100.3.
WHAT'S THE TEMPERATURE THAT WE
SHOULD BE CONCERNED ABOUT?
>> WELL, THIS DEPENDS, OF
COURSE, WHAT YOUR NORMAL BODY
TEMPERATURE IS BECAUSE SOME
PEOPLE MAY HAVE A LITTLE BIT
LOW, OR A LITTLE BIT HIGH FROM
THE TEXTBOOK.
BUT 103 IS CERTAINLY, AS IN THE
DUNCAN CASE, 103 WOULD BE
CERTAINLY SOMETHING I WOULD BE
VERY CONCERNED ABOUT.
100.3 I THINK IS STILL SOMETHING
TO CONSIDER GIVEN HIS
CIRCUMSTANCES; HE PROBABLY KNEW
THAT THIS WAS SOMETHING
SIGNIFICANT.
ORDINARILY, YOU MIGHT THINK YOU
WERE COMING DOWN WITH A COLD OR
THE FLU OR SOMETHING LIKE THAT.
BUT IF YOU HAVE BEEN IN CONTACT
WITH EBOLA-INFECTED PATIENTS YOU
MIGHT HAVE A LOWER THRESHOLD FOR
BEING CONCERNED AND DOING
SOMETHING.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT,
DR. STEPHEN MORSE FROM THE
MAILMAN SCHOOL OF PUBLIC HEALTH
AT COLUMBIA UNIVESITY, THANKS SO
MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: AND NOW TO OUR
SIGNATURE SEGMENT.
TONIGHT, WE EXPLORE A TOPIC THAT
AFFECTS MILLIONS OF PARENTS
ACROSS THE NATION, THOSE WHOSE
CHILDREN PLAY SOCCER.
IT'S ALWAYS BEEN CONSIDERED A
SAFE ALTERNATIVE TO FOOTBALL,
BUT AT LEAST ONE LEADING
NEUROSURGEON AND ONE OF
AMERICA'S BEST-KNOWN SOCCER
STARS NOW BELIEVE THE GAME POSES
RISKS NOT FULLY UNDERSTOOD
BEFORE, THE LINK BETWEEN HEADING
AND CONCUSSIONS.
IN FACT, SOCCER IS ONE OF THE
LEADING CAUSES OF CONCUSSIONS
AMONG KIDS PLAYING SPORTS.
HOW GREAT ARE THE RISKS?
THE NEWSHOUR'S WILLIAM BRANGHAM,
WHOSE THREE KIDS PLAY SOCCER,
WENT LOOKING FOR ANSWERS.
>> ALL RIGHT, HERE, MY MAN, WE
ARE JUST GOING TO TAKE A LOOK AT
YOUR EARS.
>> Reporter: DR. RICHARD FLYER
HAS BEEN MY FAMILY'S
PEDIATRICIAN FOR 13 YEARS, AND,
TO BE TOTALLY HONEST, I LOVE THE
GUY.
I ADMIRE HIM AND I TRUST HIM.
BUT THREE YEARS AGO, WHEN MY SON
JACK WAS TEN, FLYER SAID
SOMETHING THAT FLOORED US.
HE TOLD JACK HE WANTED HIM TO
STOP PLAYING SOCCER, COMPLETELY.
FLYER ARGUED THAT THE DOZENS AND
DOZENS OF KIDS HE'D SEEN WITH
SERIOUS, SOMETIMES LIFE-ALTERING
CONCUSSIONS-- SOME OF THEM FROM
HEADING THE BALL-- HAD CONVINCED
HIM THAT SOCCER ITSELF WAS NOT
SAFE.
>> WE NEED TO LOOK AT THESE
SPORTS REALISTICALLY AND SAY,
"ARE THEY REALLY SOMETHING WE
WANT OUR CHILDREN TO DO?"
DO WE WANT TO, IN THE NAME OF
SPORT, PUT A CHILD'S BRAIN IN
HARM'S WAY?
>> Reporter: FLYER'S WARNING GOT
ME AND MY WIFE TORY TO TAKE A
LONG AND UNCOMFORTABLE LOOK AT
WHETHER THE SPORT OUR THREE KIDS
LOVE IS SAFE.
THE BENEFITS THEY GET OUT OF THE
GAME?
THOSE ARE OBVIOUS, BUT ARE THEY
WORTH THE RISKS OF A SERIOUS
INJURY?
FOR THE LAST FEW YEARS, WE'VE
BEEN STRUGGLING WITH A DILEMMA
THAT'S FACING REALLY MILLIONS OF
PARENTS ACROSS THE COUNTRY.
>> I JUST FEEL REALLY CONFUSED
AND WORRIED AND JUST UNSURE WHAT
WE'RE SUPPOSED TO DO NOW.
>> Reporter: IT'S IMPORTANT TO
SAY THAT WE BECAME A SOCCER
FAMILY PARTLY BY DESIGN.
OUR THREE KIDS ARE JACK, WHO'S
13, GAVIN IS 11, AND ALLY IS
NINE.
WHEN THEY WERE LITTLE, THEY ALL
TRIED A LOT OF DIFFERENT SPORTS,
BUT WHEN IT CAME TIME TO
OFFICIALLY JOIN A TEAM, WE
REALLY STEERED THEM TO SOCCER,
WHICH WE THOUGHT WAS A "SAFE"
SPORT COMPARED TO SOMETHING LIKE
FOOTBALL.
>> BROWN LEFT WITH THE GAME WITH
A CONCUSSION.
>> I THINK I KNEW ENOUGH, AND
THIS WAS NOW 10 YEARS AGO, TO
>> I THINK I KNEW ENOUGH-- AND
THIS IS NOW TEN YEARS AGO-- TO
KNOW THAT FOOTBALL WASN'T REALLY
AN OPTION FOR OUR KIDS.
>> Reporter: BECAUSE IT WASN'T
SAFE.
>> BECAUSE IT WAS CONSIDERED
UNSAFE.
>> Reporter: THEN, IN 2008, THAT
IDEA WAS DRIVEN HOME BY AN AWFUL
TRAGEDY IN OUR TOWN.
A 16 YEAR-OLD FOOTBALL PLAYER AT
MONTCLAIR HIGH SCHOOL, RYNE
DOUGHERTY, DIED FROM A BRAIN
HEMORRHAGE HE GOT TACKLING
DURING A GAME.
THREE WEEKS BEFORE, HE'D HAD
ANOTHER HARD HIT AND A
CONCUSSION.
THE WHOLE TOWN WAS REALLY SHAKEN
UP BY HIS DEATH.
DID WE CONSOLE OURSELVES,
THINKING, WELL, THAT COULDN'T
HAPPEN TO OUR KIDS?
I DON'T KNOW.
MAYBE.
BUT WE KEPT SIGNING THE KIDS UP,
AND THEY WERE PLAYING AND LOVING
SOCCER.
>> I REALLY LIKE PLAYING, HOW
THERE ARE POSITIONS, BECAUSE
THERE'S, LIKE, A SPECIAL THING
THAT YOU HAVE TO DO WHEN YOU'RE
DOING IT SO YOU FEEL LIKE YOU'RE
AN IMPORTANT PART OF IT.
>> YOU GET TO MOVE AROUND A LOT,
AND THAT YOU HAVE TO BE A GOOD
TEAM, NOT JUST BE COMPOSED OF
GOOD PLAYERS.
>> SOCCER IS JUST THE BEST SPORT
THERE IS, PERIOD.
>> Reporter: THAT SAID, I CAN'T
PRETEND THAT DR. FLYER'S
WARNINGS WEREN'T ALWAYS
SOMEWHERE IN THE BACK OF OUR
MINDS.
IN 2012, ONE OF JACK'S SOCCER
MATES, A BOY NAMED NICK GRAHAM,
WENT UP FOR A HEADER, FELL TO
THE GROUND AND SUFFERED SUCH A
SEVERE CONCUSSION THAT HIS
HEADACHES AND DIZZINESS DIDN'T
GET BETTER FOR MONTHS.
NICK LEFT THE TEAM AND HASN'T
PLAYED SINCE.
WITHIN THE LAST YEAR, AT LEAST
THREE OF JACK'S TEAMMATES HAVE
SUFFERED CONCUSSIONS.
DID THAT MAKE US THINK ABOUT
TAKING JACK OR ANY OF OUR KIDS
OUT OF SOCCER?
HONESTLY, NO.
SEEING THEM LEARN THE VALUE OF
HARD WORK AND DEDICATION, HOW TO
HANDLE THE SUCCESSES AND THE
FAILURES, IT ALL SEEMED WORTH IT
TO US.
>> IN THIS DAY AND AGE, THERE'S
SO MANY WARNINGS, PARENTAL
WARNINGS.
IT'S NOT SAFE TO WALK TO SCHOOL,
IT'S NOT SAFE TO DRINK THAT
DRINK, IT'S NOT SAFE TO LOOK AT
THAT SCREEN.
THERE'S SO MANY "NO'S."
AND QUITE FRANKLY, SOME OF THE
THINGS IN LIFE THAT ARE THE MOST
FUN AND ARE MOST REWARDING HAVE
SOME RISK INVOLVED.
AND I'M NOT ENCOURAGING MY KIDS
TO SKYDIVE.
WHAT I'M SAYING IS, SOCCER IS
FUN AND IT'S THRILLING AND IT'S
EXCITING AN...
>> Reporter: AND IT GIVES THEM
SO MUCH.
>> AND IT GIVES THEM A LOT OF
PLEASURE, SO I WASN'T PREPARED
TO TAKE THAT AWAY FROM THEM.
>> Reporter: BUT THEN, DURING
THE 2014 WORLD CUP, WHICH WE
LOVED BUT ALSO WHERE WE SAW SOME
OF THOSE REALLY BRUTAL BLOWS TO
THE HEAD, I READ THIS STORY
ABOUT A MOVEMENT TO TAKE HEADING
OUT OF KID'S SOCCER BECAUSE OF
CONCERN OVER CONCUSSIONS.
I RAISED THIS QUESTION WITH A
FRIEND WHO'S SPENT HIS ENTIRE
LIFE AROUND THE GAME.
DECLAN CARNEY WAS BORN IN
IRELAND.
HE MANAGES MY SON JACK'S TEAM,
AND OUR SONS HAVE PLAYED
TOGETHER FOR SEVERAL YEARS.
>> THERE'S NO QUESTION THAT
CONCUSSIONS NEED TO BE DEALT
WITH AND NEED TO BE TAKEN VERY
SERIOUSLY WHENEVER THEY HAPPEN.
BUT IF SOCCER, HEADING A SOCCER
BALL WAS ACTUALLY A REAL DANGER
OF SOME SORT OF BRAIN INJURY, I
THINK IT WOULD'VE EXHIBITED
ITSELF SOMEWHERE IN MEDICAL
HISTORY IN EUROPE OR IN SOUTH
AMERICA OR IN ASIA, WHERE PEOPLE
PLAY SOCCER PRETTY MUCH ALL
THEIR LIFE AND HAVE DONE FOR THE
LAST 80, 100 YEARS.
AND I DON'T THINK THE SCIENCE
SAYS IT'S THERE.
>> Reporter: I CHECKED, AND
DECLAN IS RIGHT; THERE AREN'T
ANY LARGE-SCALE, LONG TERM
STUDIES CONNECTING SOCCER TO
BRAIN INJURY AMONG THE MILLIONS
OF SOCCER PLAYERS IN EUROPE OR
SOUTH AMERICA OR ASIA.
BUT THAT ARTICLE I READ CITED
ONE SMALL AMERICAN STUDY SHOWING
THAT ADULT AMATEUR SOCCER
PLAYERS WHO HEADED THE BALL A
LOT-- BETWEEN ABOUT 900 AND
1,500 TIMES A YEAR-- SHOWED
ABNORMALITIES IN THEIR BRAINS
REPRESENTED HERE BY THE RED AND
YELLOW SECTIONS.
THESE ARE EFFECTS SIMILAR TO
WHAT YOU'D SEE IN CONCUSSIONS,
BUT MANY OF THESE PLAYERS SAID
THEY HADN'T HAD CONCUSSIONS.
THE SUGGESTION BEING THAT BRAIN
TRAUMA MIGHT BE OCCURRING FROM A
LOT OF HEADING WITHOUT OBVIOUS
SYMPTOMS.
KEEP IN MIND, 900 TO 1,500
HEADERS A YEAR IS FAR MORE THAN
ANY KID I KNOW EVER HEADS THE
BALL, EVEN WITH REGULAR
PRACTICE.
BUT THAT ARTICLE ALSO QUOTED
THIS MAN, DR. ROBERT CANTU.
HE'S A NEUROSURGEON, CO-DIRECTS
A BRAIN STUDY CENTER AT BOSTON
UNIVERSITY, AND IS ONE OF THE
NATION'S TOP EXPERTS ON YOUTH
CONCUSSIONS.
CANTU ACKNOWLEDGES THE SCIENCE
CONNECTING SOCCER WITH BRAIN
INJURY IS LIMITED.
HE'S IN FACT CALLED FOR MUCH
MORE RESEARCH.
BUT EVEN SO, HE THINKS IT'S
BETTER TO BE SAFE THAN SORRY AND
NOT ALLOW YOUNG KIDS TO HEAD THE
BALL.
>> IF YOU TOOK HEADING OUT OF
SOCCER, IT WOULDN'T BE BEHIND
FOOTBALL IN THE INCIDENCE OF
CONCUSSION.
IT WOULDN'T EVEN BE IN THE HIGH-
RISK GROUP.
IT WOULD BE IN A LOW-RISK GROUP.
>> Reporter: CANTU TOLD ME THAT
HEADING THE BALL AS WELL AS THE
COLLISIONS AND THE HARD FALLS TO
THE GROUND THAT OFTEN ACCOMPANY
THEM ARE PROBLEMATIC FOR KIDS
BECAUSE UNLIKE ADULT BRAINS,
KIDS' BRAINS ARE STILL
DEVELOPING.
>> THE YOUNG BRAIN IS LARGELY
NOT MYELINATED.
MYELIN IS THE COATING OF NERVE
FIBERS THAT CONNECT NERVE CELLS,
SIMILAR TO COATING ON A
TELEPHONE WIRE.
IT HELPS TRANSMISSION, BUT IT
ALSO GIVES STRENGTH.
AND SO, WHEN YOU VIOLENTLY SHAKE
THE YOUNG BRAIN, YOU HAVE A MUCH
GREATER CHANCE TO DISRUPT NERVE
FIBERS AND THEIR CONNECTIONS
THAN YOU DO AN ADULT BRAIN.
>> Reporter: AND THERE'S THIS:
A KID'S HEAD SITS ON A LESS
DEVELOPED NECK AND TORSO THAN AN
ADULT'S, SO THE SAME BLOW MIGHT
CAUSE MORE DAMAGE TO A KID THAN
A GROWNUP.
>> SO, YOU'VE GOT A "BOBBLE
HEAD" DOLL EFFECT WITH OUR
YOUNGSTERS SO THAT THE VERY
MINIMAL IMPACT IS NOW GOING TO
SET THEIR BRAIN IN MUCH MORE
MOTION THAN IT WOULD AN ADULT
BRAIN WITH A STRONG NECK.
>> Reporter: CANTU SAYS
STRENGTHENING KID'S NECK MUSCLES
CAN HELP, BUT THOSE SOCCER
HELMETS AND HEADGEAR DON'T
REALLY OFFER MUCH PROTECTION, SO
HE SAYS THERE'S ONLY ONE THING
LEFT TO DO.
>> TAKE THE MOST INJURIOUS
ACTIVITY FOR HEAD INJURY OUT OF
IT, BUT LET THE REST OF THE
SPORT GO ON.
AND THAT'S PLAYING SOCCER
WITHOUT HEADING.
>> Reporter: SOME OTHERS WHO
KNOW FAR MORE ABOUT THE GAME
THAN I DO ARE LISTENING TO
CANTU, ONE OF WHOM YOU MIGHT
RECOGNIZE.
BRANDI CHASTAIN'S DRAMATIC
PENALTY SHOT AGAINST CHINA WON
THE 1999 WORLD CUP FOR THE U.S.
SHE ALSO HELPED WIN GOLD FOR THE
U.S. AT TWO DIFFERENT OLYMPICS.
SHE NOW LIVES IN NORTHERN
CALIFORNIA WITH HER HUSBAND AND
HER EIGHT-YEAR-OLD SON JADEN.
SHE COACHES HIS TEAM AND HELPS
COACH A DIVISION 1 TEAM AT SANTA
CLARA UNIVERSITY.
SHE, ALONG WITH SEVERAL OF HER
FORMER TEAMMATES FROM THE U.S.
NATIONAL TEAM, HAVE JOINED
FORCES WITH DR. CANTU'S
ORGANIZATION.
>> WE DON'T NEED TO HAVE HEADING
IN YOUTH SOCCER, 14 AND UNDER.
>> Reporter: THE INTERESTING
THING IS, JUST A FEW YEARS AGO,
CHASTAIN WAS ON NBC SAYING THAT
HEADING WAS SAFE FOR KIDS AS
LONG AS THEY WERE TRAINED
CORRECTLY.
>> IT'S A PART OF THE GAME, IT'S
AN IMPORTANT PART, AND IT'S A
BEAUTIFUL PART OF THE GAME.
>> Reporter: AT THE TIME, YOU
WERE SAYING, "I THINK THAT IT
CAN BE TAUGHT TO KIDS, AND IT
SHOULD STAY IN THE GAME FOR
KIDS."
NOW, YOU THINK DIFFERENTLY.
I WONDER WHAT WAS IT IN
PARTICULAR THAT CHANGED YOUR
MIND?
>> I THINK IT WAS HEARING THE
INFORMATION THAT DR. CANTU WAS
PUTTING OUT.
THE MORE I STARTED HEARING ABOUT
IT AND THE MORE RESEARCH THAT
HAS COME OUT, I JUST THOUGHT,
YOU KNOW, I HAVE TO PROTECT
THEM, AND THIS DOESN'T NEED TO
EXIST AT THIS YOUNG AGE.
>> Reporter: CHASTAIN ADMITTED
THAT SO FAR THEIR CAMPAIGN
REALLY HASN'T TAKEN OFF.
JUST A HANDFUL OF PROGRAMS HAVE
REMOVED HEADING.
SHE SAYS THE LEAD REALLY HAS TO
COME FROM THE TOP, FROM THE
INTERNATIONAL GOVERNING BODY OF
SOCCER, FIFA, AND THE U.S.
SOCCER FEDERATION.
THOSE ORGANIZATIONS ARE
CURRENTLY BEING SUED BY A GROUP
OF SOCCER PARENTS IN CALIFORNIA
WHO SAY THE GROUPS HAVEN'T DONE
ENOUGH TO PROTECT KIDS FROM HEAD
INJURY.
WE REACHED OUT TO FIFA AND TO
THE U.S. SOCCER FEDERATION FOR
COMMENT.
WHILE NEITHER WOULD GO ON THE
RECORD, CITING THE LITIGATION,
THEY BOTH SAID THAT PLAYER
SAFETY IS A PRIORITY, AND THE
FEDERATION INDICATED HEADING AND
CONCUSSIONS ARE AMONG THE TOPICS
REGULARLY REVIEWED BY ITS POLICY
MAKERS.
BACK IN NEW JERSEY, THE SOCCER
SEASON GOES ON.
WE SEE A FAIR AMOUNT OF HEADING,
ESPECIALLY IN MY OLDER SON'S
GAMES.
THE BOYS TAKE HARD ONES, SOFT
ONES.
THEY SCORE GOALS WITH THEM.
OUR SOCCER CLUB, MONTCLAIR
UNITED, SAYS IT'S VERY CONCERNED
ABOUT CONCUSSIONS AND TRAINS OUR
COACHES THOROUGHLY, BUT THEY SAY
THEY DON'T MAKE THE RULES AND SO
HEADING REMAINS A PART OF OUR
GAME.
AND QUITE FRANKLY, THERE'S A LOT
OF DOUBT ON A LOT OF PEOPLE'S
MINDS THAT HEADING IS A PROBLEM
AT ALL.
>> I HAVE A 13-YEAR-OLD SON THAT
I WANT TO PROTECT AS MUCH AS
ANYBODY WANTS TO PROTECT THEIR
SON, BUT I WILL LET MY SON HEAD
A BALL BECAUSE I SEE NO EVIDENCE
WHATSOEVER THAT THERE IS A
DANGER FOR ANYBODY IN YOUTH
SOCCER PLAYING, HEADING A BALL.
>> Reporter: BUT THEN, OUR
PEDIATRICIAN, DR. FLYER, SAYS
TAKING HEADING OUT DOESN'T GO
FAR ENOUGH IN HIS OPINION.
HE SAYS WHAT HE'S SEES IN HIS
OWN PATIENTS IS EVIDENCE ENOUGH
THAT THE SPORT ISN'T SAFE FOR
KIDS.
>> WE HAD THIS 30-YEAR
EXPERIMENT.
THE RESULTS ARE COMING IN.
IT'S NOT SAFE FOR CHILDREN TO DO
THIS.
IT'S A CONTACT SPORT.
YOU KNOW, THAT'S ALMOST A
EUPHEMISM.
IT'S A BRAIN-INJURING SPORT.
AND IF I DON'T GET THIS
INFORMATION ACROSS, EVEN THE
RISK OF UPSETTING PEOPLE, I'VE
FAILED.
>> Reporter: SO, WHERE DOES ALL
THIS LEAVE US?
MY WIFE AND KIDS AND I STILL GET
UP EVERY SATURDAY AND SUNDAY AND
GET READY FOR ANOTHER LONG
WEEKEND OF SOCCER.
BUT FULL DISCLOSURE: AFTER ALL
THE INTERVIEWS I'VE DONE, TORY
AND I RECENTLY TOLD OUR KIDS NOT
TO HEAD THE BALL ANYMORE.
SO FAR, IT'S NOT BEEN AN ISSUE
IN THEIR GAMES OR WITH THEIR
COACHES.
EVEN SO, WHEN WE GO OUT THERE
AND CHEER THEM ON, OUR
PEDIATRICIAN'S VOICE IS STILL IN
THE BACK OF OUR MINDS.
DO YOU FEEL LIKE WE'RE DOING THE
RIGHT THING BY LETTING THEM
PLAY?
>> WE ARE SORT OF PUNTING THE
BALL DOWN THE FIELD AND AVOIDING
A DECISION, WHICH, IN AND OF
ITSELF, IS A DECISION.
OUR DECISION IS THAT WE'VE LET
OUR KIDS CONTINUE TO PLAY
SOCCER.
>> Reporter: AND ARE YOU OKAY
WITH THAT?
>> WELL, YOU KNOW, I SORT OF
JUST SIT THERE SECRETLY HOPING
AT THE END OF EVERY GAME THAT
THEY WALK OFF THE FIELD IN ONE
PIECE.
I JUST WANT THEM TO BE WHOLE.
>> Sreenivasan: FOR AN EXTENDED
INTERVIEW WITH CONCUSSION
SPECIALIST DR. ROBERT CANTU,
VISIT newshour.pbs.org.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SATURDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: IT'S BEEN NEARLY
70 YEARS SINCE THE END OF WORLD
WAR II, BUT ONLY THIS MONTH
FILES RELEASED BY BRITAIN'S
NATIONAL ARCHIVE REVEALED THE
SECRET ROLE OF A BANK EMPLOYEE
WHO HELPED EXPOSE GERMAN
SYMPATHIZERS IN ENGLAND.
WHAT HE DID HELPED KEEP
SENSITIVE INFORMATION OUT OF
NAZI HANDS.
ITN'S JOHN RAY REPORTS.
>> Reporter: AS SUPER SPIES GO,
HE LOOKED EVER INCH THE SUBURBAN
BANK CLERK.
SO WHO DID ERIC ROBERTS THINK HE
WAS KIDDING?
MR. HITLER, OF COURSE, AND HIS
BAND OF BRITISH SYMPATHIZERS, OF
WHICH THERE WERE AN ALARMING
NUMBER.
FROM THE BOWELS OF MI5 EMERGES A
MURKY CHAPTER IN SECRET SERVICE
HISTORY-- HOW WE HOODWINKED THE
NAZIS.
THE RECORDS REVEAL THE
UNLIKELIEST HERO.
PLUCKED FROM OBSCURITY AT THE
WESTMINSTER BANK, MR. ROBERTS
WAS GIVEN THE COVER NAME JACK
KING AND POSED AS THE GESTAPO'S
GO-TO MAN IN LONDON.
NOT BAD FOR SOMEONE WHO BARELY
SPOKE GERMAN.
BY THE MIDDLE OF THE WAR, JACK
HAS A LIST OF HUNDREDS OF
NAZI SYMPATHIZERS, ALL OF
WHOM WHO ARE POTENTIALLY LOOKING
TO ASSIST THE NAZIS IN GETTING
CONTACT WITH JACK AS THE GESTAPO
AGENT THAT THEY KNEW HIM.
>>THE INDISCRIMINATE ATTACK BY
HITLER'S AIRMEN UPON THE
CENTRAL...
>> Reporter: BRITAIN STOOD
ALONE, THE ENEMY AT THE GATE.
WHITEHALL FEARED THEY WERE ALSO
AMONG US, LISTENING TO EVERY
LOOSE WORD.
IT TURNS OUT, THESE WARNINGS
WERE RIGHT.
THE FILES REVEAL THE DEPRESSING
AND SURPRISING LENGTH THAT
BRITISH CITIZENS WOULD GO TO
HELP THE GERMANS.
THIS IS A STORY OF A WOMAN
CALLED NANCY BROWN, WHO BROUGHT
TO JACK KING HER HAND-DRAWN MAPS
OF THE LOCAL ARMY RECORDS OFFICE
IN THE HOPE THAT THE LUFTWAFFE
WOULD BOMB IT.
HE KEPT MANY SUCH SECRETS FROM
REACHING BERLIN, BUT THE BIGGEST
SECRET HE KEPT MIGHT WELL HAVE
BEEN HIS OWN WAR-TIME ROLE.
JOHN RAY, ITV NEWS.
>> Sreenivasan: SOME MORE NEWS
BEFORE WE LEAVE YOU TONIGHT.
ATTORNEY GENERAL ERIC HOLDER
SAID TODAY THAT GAY COUPLES WHO
MARRY IN ALASKA, ARIZONA, IDAHO,
NORTH DAKOTA, WEST VIRGINIA AND
WYOMING WILL NOW QUALIFY FOR
FEDERAL BENEFITS.
THAT'S ALREADY THE CASE IN 26
OTHER STATES AND THE DISTRICT OF
COLUMBIA.
DESPITE THE PROTESTS OF
INTERNATIONAL HUMAN RIGHTS
GROUPS, A 26-YEAR-OLD IRANIAN
WOMAN WAS HANGED TODAY FOR
KILLING A MAN WHO ALLEGEDLY
TRIED TO RAPE HER.
IRAN'S PRESIDENT TRIED BUT
FAILED TO STOP THE EXECUTION.
AND NBC REPORTEDLY HAS AGREED TO
PAY NEARLY $6.5 MILLION TO
SETTLE A CLASS ACTION LAWSUIT
BROUGHT BY FORMER UNPAID INTERNS
WHO WORKED AT "SATURDAY NIGHT
LIVE" AND OTHER PROGRAMS AND DID
THE WORK OF PAID EMPLOYEES.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
SEE YOU BACK HERE TOMORROW
NIGHT.